Debbie Vitany is fighting a losing battle against Fortnite.
Her seventeen year old son, Carson, has been logging twelve hours a day on the video game, searching for weapons and resources in a post-apocalyptic world where the goal is being the last person standing. Teachers complain he falls asleep in class and his grades have plummeted.
Wed made some progress in getting him to cut down his Fortnite hours and get better sleep, but hes slipped back into his old habits, Vitany, who lives near Saginaw, Michigan, said in an interview. Ive never seen a game that has such control over kids minds.
Vitanys anguish is echoed by an army of other parents, teachers and bosses around the world grappling with a game that sucks up hours of players time  sometimes to the detriment of other activities. More than two hundred million people have registered to play Fortnite, which has become a billion-dollar business for its creator, Epic Games Inc. Some desperate parents have sent their kids to rehab.
This game is like heroin, said Lorrine Marer, a British behavioural specialist who works with kids battling game addiction. Once you are hooked, its hard to get unhooked.
Epic has issued past warnings about avoiding Fortnite scammers, but it declined to comment on the addiction issue.
Video-game addiction isnt new: parents and teachers have been carping about distracted children  and their joystick-addled hands since the days of Atari consoles. But the ubiquity of Fortnite has created a more widespread menace. And its happening against the backdrop of broader concerns about social-media and smartphone overuse.
Fortnite, first released in its popular battle royale mode in September two thousand and seventeen, isnt just causing problems for kids. An online UK divorce service says two hundred petitions cited Fortnite and other video games this year as the reason for the break-up of marriages.
Professional athletes are getting hooked, too. The National Hockey Leagues Vancouver Canucks had so much trouble getting players to meetings and dinners they banned Fortnite on the road. David Price, star pitcher for Major League Baseballs World Series-winning Boston Red Sox, was scratched from a May start against the arch-rival New York Yankees because of wrist problems that may have been exacerbated by Fortnite playing.
Randy Kulman, a child psychologist in Wakefield, Rhode Island, has seen a surge in parents taking their kids to counselling because of video-game addictions.
I had a 13-year-old in my office who said he had three hundred Fortnite wins, Kulman said. I had to stop for a minute and calculate what he had to invest just to get those.
Michael Jacobus, who runs the Reset Summer Camp for kids with addictions, said about sixty per cent of the one hundred and twenty children he counselled at camps in Santa Barbara, California, and Asheville, North Carolina, last summer were playing Fortnite excessively. Treatment involves a technology detox  their devices are taken away  combined with healthy eating, sleep and group therapy. Next summer, he plans to enrol more than twice as many kids, with additional locations in Texas, Indiana and New York.
Video games are as addictive as crack cocaine or gambling to some players, warns WHO
Fortnite is particularly compelling because the battle royale version is free to play and available on a range of devices from phones to gaming consoles, notes Cam Adair, who dropped out of high school at age 15 due to his own video-game addiction and now speaks on the subject to schools and others groups. Fortnite players compete in 100-person fights until the last one is standing  matches that make it difficult to quit once theyre started.
Its the second world war if a parent asks their son to come to dinner because if they leave they lose, Adair said.
While the game is free, Epic has created opportunities to sell hundreds of dollars of add-ons  including exotic weapons and skins, such as Dark Voyager, a black space suit with reflective striping  on credit cards. The company recently partnered with the National Football League to sell jerseys based on players favourite teams.
Parents have lost substantial amounts of money by not paying attention to whether their credit card is tied to the game console, said Marer, the behavioural specialist.
In October, Epic capitalised on Fortnites popularity by raising one point two five billion from an investor group that included Vulcan Capital and Kleiner Perkins. The deal values the closely held company at US fifteen billion dollars.
Video games have generated a backlash before. The Grand Theft Auto series, made by Take-Two Interactive Software Inc, has at times been banned in countries around the globe for its extreme violence and sexual content. The industry has also drawn criticism following mass shootings that involved individuals linked to video games.
In April, Dutch gaming regulators released a study stating that loot boxes, where players purchase merchandise in a game without knowing exactly what they are getting, amounted to gambling and can be addictive.
For now, Fortnite is the game of choice. On a recent afternoon, the game was the most-viewed on Amazon.coms Twitch streaming service, with two hundred and fifty thousand people watching others play.
The World Health Organisation designated gaming disorder as a disease for the first time in June, a move that could make it easier for parents to seek reimbursement for treatment from insurers, according Paul Weigle, a psychiatrist in Mansfield Centre, Connecticut.
Weigle, whos seeing about twenty compulsive Fortnite players, recommends that parents keep kids under ten from playing video games. And parents need to set limits when they do play. As games get more sophisticated in their ability to hook fans, he sees the issue of addiction only growing.
Its going to be more of a problem than it is now, Weigle said