Whenever I go back through old diaries of past trips, May seems to be a winner on the offshore scene. Im very pleased to report the weather has been pretty kind of late here on the Capricorn Coast. We went about four months over the warmer months with very few opportunities to head wide. That has all been forgotten, with excellent weather windows presenting themselves. All the reports coming through have been about red fish. More so large-mouth nannygai than red emperor but either is a welcome addition to the Esky.
Targeting nannygai
Nannies can be a real pain in the backside to crack the code on if youre new to the offshore fishing scene. I remember years ago when I was wanting to put decent nannygai footage together the buggers just seemed to fall off the face of the earth, for a few trips anyway. All my usual nanny haunts were turning up empty. I ended up heading east-southeast to the old Fitzroy River bed to try my luck. To my surprise, large-mouth nannygai were in good numbers around this area and I was able to get all the video required in only a few short hours. So where and what are you supposed to be looking for?
Where to find them
I love flatter ground when chasing large-mouth nannygai. Its the kind of ground that doesnt hold much structure. Fern ground, wonky holes and isolated rocks are my go-to areas for good numbers and size of nannies. Unfortunately, these areas can be hard to find. They arent generally just lying around in some list of marks you got off the internet or from a mate. Finding these marks requires an understanding of the electronics being used, of what the sounder screen is showing you and of where to begin looking.
It would take an entire publication to go into the nitty-gritty, so for now we shall keep it short and simple. How many times have you read the words sounding at speed in an article or heard them mentioned in videos? Its because this is the number-one rule for finding new ground. Its amazing how many people still havent grasped the concept.
Getting the transducer to read at speed will turn travel time into search time. Keeping a keen eye on the sounder will reveal hidden gems. Some of the minor changes in bottom or bait patches we turn back around on and search through would be overlooked by the untrained eye. Attention to detail is important.
Baits
My absolute favourite bait for targeting large-mouth nannygai is live yakkas (yellowtail scad). They can be hard to locate but its worth putting in the effort. A simple bait jig is all you need when sitting on top of yakka schools. Generally, yakkas are easiest to catch through winter but we have caught them all year round. Dead yakkas can be just as effective if you cant keep them alive.
Dont forget to butterfly them if the whole yakkas arent getting results. Fresh squid would be my next choice. If you cant catch your own squid, then the Lunds squid found in tackle shops is always reliable. I like to run a set of gangs so I can have hooks running through the entire bait and down towards the bottom. Ive lost count of the number of nannies that have come to the surface just hanging off the bottom hook. When they arent in proper feeding mode, this can be the difference.
Capricorn Coast offshore gear
If youre not fishing harsh structure, I like a medium spin combo with a bit of flex in the tip matched to a Shimano six thousand size reel such as a Saragosa. I find I pull way fewer hooks when using this type of gear because nannygai have soft mouths that tear easily. If fishing wrecks and other nasty places, you might not have much choice but to pull out the trusty old broomstick to get them clear of the bottom quickly. The same goes if the sharks are really bad. You wont bulldog a ten kilogram-plus nanny to the boat, so if the sharks want a feed youre in big trouble.
Simple tactics
Once a school of nannygai has been located, my best advice is to anchor up on them. If youre successful getting the spot right, you can have some red-hot sessions. Drifting through these schools often spreads them out and you will only get a few drifts before they disappear. If youve got a mid-sized boat that has a bow-mount electric, then youre ahead of the game. Electronic anchoring is king on the reef, with no anchor hitting the bottom and no chain rattling over the side.